All right.
What's your name again?
Nick.
Nicholas.
I got you.
From Worcester.
Yes, sir.
We're on Channel 27 over there.
Oh, where are you on 27?
There don't be years.
You're going out to Worcester?
No, sir.
Getting all the way back home.
Oh, I was going to say, you said you were on 27?
We've been on 30 years.
Oh, sure, yeah.
Oh, they still pay.
I'll have a cheesecake with a fresh blueberry sauce and an ice cream.
Okay, I guess you are a phenomenon of the last 10 years, I would say.
I mean, you've been around, but certainly as a national presence.
Does that surprise you?
Did you ever expect you to divorce?
Well, no, I did not.
Upon completion of my studies at Baptist Bible College in Springfield, Missouri, in 1956, at age 22, I came back to my hometown, Lynchburg, Virginia.
And with 35 persons, started, founded the Thomas Road Baptist Church.
My dreams were, in that little city of 63,000 population, to one day have a church of 500 people and preach to them every Sunday for the rest of my life.
Those were my goals.
What happened?
Well, I started on... Pardon me for asking what seems obvious, but... Yes.
Because a lot of this is in the book.
But I'm just curious, you know, how did you become such a force?
I had been converted to Jesus Christ through a radio broadcast while a college student.
Dr. Charles E. Fuller was the preacher from Long Beach Municipal Autorium, Long Beach, California.
Every Sunday I heard him on the radio.
So when I started Thomas Road Baptist Church in 1956,
I purchased time on the local radio station, 6.30 to 7 every morning, seven days a week, and live.
I would drive from my home to the radio station to that half-hour broadcast, go from there to the Thomaswood Baptist Church, which was really a little 50-foot by 30-foot building, the old Donald Duck Bottling Company building that had gone, they'd gone busty.
I'm curious, pardon me for interrupting, but I noticed that John Olbeck bought one company in the book.
Did they have to get a permission from Disney to use that name?
I have an idea they must have.
You know, this was way back when they were trying to launch a national soda, new soda, and it didn't work.
I suspect, oh, I'm sure they had to.
Because under Disney is quite... Oh, they own that.
...justly jealous of... Oh, I'm sure they had to.
That was a national thing with a local franchise.
But that was by, I started radio then, and later that same year, 1956, started on television a half hour every Sunday afternoon, 5.30 to 6 p.m., live, black and white, one and two cameras, depending on if both cameras were healthy or not.
And the idea of just reaching my local area, I learned through Fuller's radio broadcast that
that you can reach people who are not going to church.
And that I believe there are a lot of Jerry Falwells out there who are not going to attend church, whom I could reach through television and radio.
And I was thinking of reaching the local area only.
To answer the question, how did it happen, the radio and TV became very popular.
And just by osmosis, we began adding stations.
By 1971, 15 years later, we were national.
And by 1979, we had formed the moral majority.
It seems longer than 79.
I remember you putting that out in the book.
Well, I know.
But moral majority was born in June of 79.
It almost paralleled the rise of Ronald Reagan, didn't you say?
About the same time and about over the same period of time.
You know, I was in Virginia and he was in California.
I was doing my work in a little state, a little state of Virginia.
A religious work.
He was doing a political work in California.
And we both hit Washington about the same time.
Do you see significance in the fact that you both seem to have... Well, we certainly had no connections before his quest for the presidency.
I supported him in 76, and we lost.
But I support him from a distance.
In 1980, by that time,
I was convinced Ronald Reagan must be the next president of the United States.
A lot of others were so convinced, of course, as well.
I met him for the first time when he was on the campaign trail in New Orleans.
I remember flying in there, meeting with him, riding from the airport to the convention center with him in the back of the limo, talking about his dreams and his goals
His philosophy.
Totally synchronized what we were trying to do.
I pledged to him our total support.
We were at the time organizing all over America.
Pastors and evangelical churches into voting blocks.
Registering voters.
And it was a movement whose time had come.
Our people, conservative, religious conservatives have been
virtually inactive for a long, long time.
Do you think a lot of this might have to do with the traditional separation of church and state?
I mean, this is an issue I'd like to discuss because you certainly aren't very influential politically.
And, you know, a lot of people have reservations about the influence of the church on political destiny.
Perhaps you could just discuss that and maybe...
The black church in the 50s became the launching pad for the civil rights movement.
King was himself a Baptist preacher.
Most of his co-laborers were Baptist preachers.
The civil rights movement was successful because of black churches.
But the evangelical church had pretty well held to the view that religion and politics don't mix.
Politics is bad business, dirty business.
Did you subscribe to that?
I subscribed to that.
And during the civil rights days, I challenged our people to work for civil rights, but don't march in the streets.
Don't become activists.
Let's not be a part of something that could promote violence or take us away from our primary task, which is preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Uh,
I printed a sermon in 1965 called Ministers and Marches, in which I challenged the pastors of the country to stay out of the streets.
Why did you want them out of the streets?
I felt our pastors should be preaching their convictions, praying for change, but not involved in politics and particularly in activist politics.
I felt that that was demeaning to the gospel we preached.
1973, I was already troubled by that time through the breakdown of the family and the country and the various problems, the drug problems, the various moral living arrangements, etc.
1973, the Supreme Court in Roe v. Wade legalized abortion on demand.
I think that was, for me,
This is the John Marion interview, a John Marion interview coming up.
What follows is an interview with John Marion, the president
of Sotheby's in North America and the chief auctioneer in Boston in November of 1989.
That's where it starts.
We're talking about personality.
It may sound odd to you, but some people, for some people, buying at auction gives the same sort of satisfaction, if that's the right word, as gambling does.
There are people who are habitual gamblers or people who get a lot of thrill out of the game, out of playing the game.
And for many people, the...
the thrill of bidding an auction.
It is the thrill of acquiring, but it's also the thrill of playing.
And I know a person, for example, who is a dealer today in furniture, who is a reformed gambler, a gambler's anonymous person, you know, who grossly gambler's anonymous meetings and all the rest.
He became a dealer because he gets
very much the same junk, he says, out of playing roulette as going to an auctioneary.
Now he goes home with 12 chairs.
You run across some collectors who say there's a dealer, for instance, up in Paul Richards, up in Templeton.
Yeah, I know him.
He buys a deal of auctions.
He has two rooms named after him here at Boston University.
They're basically things that he's acquired.
Once acquired, he's not interested anymore.
And I think Jerome Kern was the same way.
I mean, it was the acquisition of the item.
The Chase.
That was so important.
Well, in a way, Andy Warhol was that way.
Andy Warhol would buy these things and many times not even unwrap them.
So they were in the same boxes he bought them in.
He wasn't a book collector, was he?
No, they were not really books.
Is Bill Cosby a book collector?
Not to my knowledge.
Somebody suggested that he might be wonderful.
Not rare books, anyway.
He'd be wonderful.
And I'm looking for a little star quality, too.
I want to try and talk to Larry McMurtry, for instance, who'd be very interesting.
He's a writer who's also a dealer.
He's written a Cadillac Jack is about a sculpt.
You know, Paul Richards, I believe he's also a bottle collector.
Yeah, he collects everything.
I remember selling an auction and he came with all the bottle people.
You know, it's a whole group.
You know, they come in bands and everything.
It's a very different group.
But here he was right in the middle of it.
You say one thing in your book, which I...
My wife and I like, we can go out on antiques.
This is the antique capital of the world, I think.
That's right, yeah.
Tremendously hard.
You can't really go out and find things.
And, you know, we have the bizarre thing.
Not bizarre, but let's say my house is a unique melange, as I'm sure your place says, as I've read.
But one thing I hadn't realized is that you can go shopping at South of East.
Yeah.
You can actually, it's not a question of going and spending $10,000 that you can't afford,
or some splendidly useless land.
But you can actually go and buy wonderful things with a minor provenance, shall we say, and if you want to look at it as an investment.
But I mean, this is an alternative to going to the department store.
It certainly is.
Because that seems to be a message that you're going to see.
And one of the good things about that is if you do it on a constant basis, you're exposing yourself to all the different collecting fields.
Well, you're creating connoisseurship at that point.
It makes it possible for you then to identify the various areas that are of interest to you.
And it's only through exposing yourself to these things that you have a facility for them that you feel comfortable, you feel attracted to them.
Develops taste, doesn't it?
Yeah.
And the end product of all of this is quality of life.
That's what we're talking about because just as you
gather things those things mean something personal to you when they're around your home you live with those things you can probably remember the way you acquired every single one of them they all have a story to them yeah i have a clock i grew up in a lowell industrial city right there and uh when i was a kid they were building a bridge and they were dredging the merrimack river and they pulled out all these crocks i'm happy to be walking by and i've got this which i thought was enormous you know it turns out to be a coil
for it 15, 20 years later when I was in college.
It has a PH Dunahue and Sun wines.
I researched it.
It was Patrick Henry Dunahue.
It's just a clock that we might sell for 15 bucks.
I would die if I watched that piece.
This is a wonderful story.
It's really a meaningful thing to you.
I have a little thing I got off my aircraft carrier.
I was a naval officer.
I went through Newport, not unlike yourself.
You know, little things from the ship.
One of these pins that they attach the ship to, the aircraft to, before they launch it.
It's junk, but they throw them over the side after they use.
But, you know, that's nice.
That's part of my, it's an artifact that kind of creates the substance of your life.
I sit and sell to these.
That's an enormous, extraordinary.
That is the largest, is that the largest gallery?
Oh, yeah.
I think by a lot.
In the world?
Yeah.
Because we can put in that room, for a big impression, so we can put 1,200 people in that room.
That's a big one.
I have in my notes, my book, by the way, will start, I think.
It's perfect with that auction.
And I've even got the opening line, the bidding open there, $500,000.
and proceeded at $50,000.
$50,000 is the exact sum that Henry Huntington paid for the Gutenberg Bible at the wholesale in 1911.
Huntington came from California and sat at the elbow of George Smith, his dealer.
Here's Dick Manny sitting at the elbow of his dealer.
Let's go back to Bradley Martin.
Do you mind for a second?
Some people wondered, felt,
Why didn't, if you knew Bradley Martin, why didn't he designate his collection to go to an institution?
Do you think that he had it in his mind, I got my books from collectors, as Ho said in the first volume of his sale catalog, Beverly Chew said, he said, well, if it weren't for the collectors, where would I have gotten my books?
I mean, this is a nice thing to be said, but I wonder if that's the case.
Or do you think that the Bessemer Trust was, and I know you can't speak for them,
But, nevertheless, one wonders, you had this, what was arguably the finest ornithological collection anywhere.
Would it have been nice to keep it as a collection?
How do you feel about that?
You always have that argument.
This is from my book and not my story.
You always have that argument being made.
I, being in the art world, would prefer to see the things in circulation to give other collectors the enjoyment in perpetuity.
I don't believe that everything can go into a museum, otherwise there would be no collection.
I think that part of things for the education and scholarship of the future should be in institutions.
But I love also to see things which are fresh, wonderful, collectible things.
come onto the market.
It generates and energizes more collectors in the future and has a real place in our society.
So I think it's a good thing that things do come on the market.
The purists, or at least they think of themselves as purists,
I think that would be the worst thing that could happen to the marketplace.
And that doesn't necessarily guarantee access, either.
No, it sure does, because an awful lot of these things never see the light of day.
I mean, Samuel Pepys had a unique private library, and thank goodness it's intact.
but just try and go see any of it.
It's so unique that you can't touch it.
Yeah, the Barnes Corp.
in Philadelphia has to make an appointment to go and see it.
It would be nice if some of those things were out there.
Nicholas Barker was in Worcester, as it happens, two weeks ago.
The American Endocrine Society is there.
Again, it's fortuitous that I see you today.
I was planning a trip to England, interviewed Mr. Barker, and here he comes into my backyard.
That's wonderful.
And he said he knew Martin well himself.
He said, I feel that if he really, he's a white man, articulate, knowledgeable, and that if he wanted this thing to remain as a collection, he would have done it.
And if somebody had gone out, a lot of the things were at the Morgan Library.
If they had made the right overtures and the right plans and all the rest with him, maybe he would have left more.
We can't answer any of those questions now.
But for somebody who was so meticulous with his collection, you have to assume that he would have either made the arrangement, or he didn't make the arrangement because he couldn't bring himself to make it, or he wanted to have happen exactly what did happen.
And I think another argument is people say, well, we want to preserve them.
There are others who say, hey, if a guy pays $2 million for a book, he's going to take good care of it.
He's not going to trap the ball at that point.
Book collectors especially are people that are so meticulous in keeping records and planning and all the rest of it that I would think they would make very inclined arrangements.
You don't get in that much in the book about book collecting.
No.
In trends, I was looking for it in the trends section.
But I would imagine that it parallels everything else.
Yeah.
Well, I know less about it.
There's one reason.
Isn't it interesting, though, to go back to what I was suggesting about a book haul?
You know, years ago, the New York Times, the TBR, you had a rare book haul.
column, regular feature.
That's right.
Nothing like that.
Now, the garden sale rated one graph.
Rita Reif gave it one graph in the Times.
It was buried in the Picasso piece.
The Cooney went for 20 mil the day before, so in context, what the hell is $2 million when you're doing 20 and 30 for other things?
In their minds, they've given too much exposure to Sotheby's auctions.
They don't think of it as what the public is interested in.
Yeah, they do.
It's unbelievable.
That was one of the most fascinating... I mean, that was a week of unbelievable things.
That all should have been covered.
And I have told that to the editors.
But I'm glad.
But Reeder did put Manny's name in the paper, which was a blessing for me.
I knew who he was, and I hadn't even approached him yet.
I wasn't going to approach him until the first of the year.
I had heard that he's a very nice guy, approachable, and maybe ready to talk.
But by her just giving him one sentence in the Times,
It opened it up.
Yeah, but he's happy to talk.
This is the piece I've done for Maine Antiques Digest.
I can't give it to you because it's still... We talk about gambling, right?
This is a quote from... Are you interested in hearing any of this?
Yeah, sure.
This is pretty good.
I have you in here, by the way.
In my heart of hearts, this is... Oh, here we go.
Self-abuse North America, President, Chief Actioneer General, Mary, an open meeting when the Shakespeare is at $500,000.
Say that again.
I look down, and I can see him shaking his head no, but he shook his head no.
Dick did or Cummins did?
No, he was the one.
I mean, Cummins took an order to take the hand.
No, and I looked away, and that's when I looked back at him, and I said, think about it.
I just gave him that moment, and I know the man well.
that I knew he would think about.
I knew he was going to come back in bed.
How did you know that?
It's my instinct.
This is pertinent to the piece and to the book, by the way.
That's why I do what I do.
And better than anybody else.
But I knew it.
I knew that there was another business.
He told me he was willing to go to see me.
He stopped.
He said he stopped, not because of the price.
He said he stopped because he has a second, he already has a second polio, he already has a fourth polio, and he has an opportunity, he had an opportunity to buy another first polio.
And he said, but this is the best set I'll ever see in my lifetime, so go for it.
But that's not in my problem, as it were, or my knowledge.
I had no idea what else he's doing.
Well, I know that he stopped, and I had the other bid, and I knew he would bid again, and that's why I went back there.
Do you think he was good for one more bid, the telephone guy?
Oh, who knows?
You know, I just knew he was, at that moment, I knew.
Yeah.
Tell me something about Haven O'Moore.
I met him.
I've only met him there.
I have no idea about Haven O'Moore.
I talked to him, you know, and I thought I was going to be braced by Secret Service guys.
More power, you did it right.
I read the papers of the courthouse.
I know that you signed the, didn't even have to talk, but I didn't, because it's in the papers.
But, I mean, a confidentiality agreement, so you had to do what you had to do.
And all you have to do is read the forwards of the catalog.
Yeah.
And also, not just the forwards, the statement of the back is extraordinary.
How about that bust?
Where the hell did that bust come from?
That bust himself.
How long was he building the collection?
Do you know that?
I don't know that.
I really have no idea.
Davis is an investor.
Is he from New England?
I assume so.
I mean, I'll go off.
I really don't know.
Well, you know, I mean, you know, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean,
and it's all it's all lucid and it's all absolutely i mean he'll talk you know that's fine but i'm going down to see edwin wolf in philly you know him at rosenbach biographer oh yeah well he knew rose but dave knew he must have very good rosenbach stories all the stories but you know he's worth a profile great you might think about that was he a collector as well dave no i think he just uh informed collection do you think he got set that's a good question isn't it
It's a good question that goes beyond books.
Yeah, kind of like the parent molding the child.
I've seen it go both ways.
You know, a dealer who is a collector has a difficult problem.
Plus, the dealer who is truly the educator in supplying property to his customers, his clients.
I thought it was half an hour, right?
I don't know.
I'm just answering the questions.
I assume she's done something.
Okay, good.
I thought I was out of time.
The dealer who is really acting as the educator and servicing his clients, when faced with finding something which is an unusual rarity, is that dealer obligated to turn over something which he finds to the customer or to give it for his own collections?
when the dealer is a great collector, too.
And I know some who are great collectors and some who have no feeling at all for the object to keep an object.
I mean, they love the object, but they love to sell the object.
There's two different things there, and it's a very interesting thing.
I know a dealer who has one of the great collections in the world of modern art, and it's a difficult problem.
However, I know collectors, and I can only talk to book collectors, who mistrust dealers who collect.
Because he's not going to... That's what you just said.
He's not going to offer me the best stuff.
Right.
You know, if he does, he's going to make the price so dear.
And it's the same reason that people who are collectors who back a dealer, generally speaking, that dealer is not somebody you should buy from.
Because the first shot at all the good things go to the backer.
The dealer has got to be... I know a case where this is precisely the situation.
The guy's a collector and he's an asylum partner in a bookstore.
And all the best stuff goes to him.
Yeah, all the time.
Of course, there's got to be a motive for him doing it.
It's not going to be a financial thing.
You can find lots of other businesses to invest in.
Do you go to flea markets and things?
I have over time, not on a regular basis.
Are you still collecting?
Have you reached kind of the point?
Well, my wife and I have a number of different homes.
And we're trying.
We have different interests in the different homes.
And so the one where my things mainly are, because she is a great collector, where my things mainly are, we're moving into in the next month.
And so a lot of my things have been packed away for a while.
So then we'll start again.
The point of the book, well, obviously, is this to interest more people than go any?
Well, I'll tell you the truth.
The point of the book for me is... Yeah, let's talk a little bit specifically about the book.
To me, the point of this book is really a lifelong aim of mine, which is to take the mystery out of the art market, to have people feel as though they could really come in and not be taken advantage of, that they really could get involved in this process, that it is understandable, that it is enjoyable.
And I spent my life doing this.
When I started in the auction business,
It was caveat emptor, you know, the buyer beware.
It still is.
Well, there's a guarantee of authenticity now.
At your place, yeah.
Well, I put that in, 1972.
It was my first thing I became president.
Guarantee of authenticity and estimates in the catalog.
Now, you think today how helpful all that is, and the fact that you have more illustrations and things like that.
And the customer service department, all these things that are meant
to make the public feel that they can really take part in here and not be threatened.
One of the real problems with somebody that wants to start collecting is that they walk into a dealer's shop and they think, my God, he's going to think I'm stupid.
I don't know anything.
I'll be found out.
And I try to take that away.
That's the real purpose.
Because I think, sincerely, I believe that it is a very enjoyable thing.
And I really do believe that the quality of life is something which is the end product of the amount of effort and everything that goes into it.
And it's something that I've seen over and over again happen in people's lives.
And it's a wonderful thing to have happen.
And it's part of what my whole career has been formed on.
I've got to send you some copies of stories about that.
The first book collecting piece I did, it starts with a quote from Thomas Jefferson, I cannot live without books.
And then there's a quote from Michael Sadler who said, if book collecting and this applies to anything, and you even apply this in your book, it's not necessarily the early bird that gets the worm to come, it's the bird that knows a worm when he sees one.
Wonderful quote.
And then I have a quote from, it's not bad, huh?
who said that michael sadlier who's a famous collector of the 30s and 40s uh i can send an exact quote because it applies to any anything you know and then there's another one a quote from larry mcmurtry's novel cadillac jack which is anything can be anywhere and this guy's a scout and he tells the story in there of going you know cadillac jack is based on a real guy and i'm going to try and find him he goes around a cadillac with cowboy boots
like he just came out of a swamp from Texas.
He had long hair, but he knows everything, and he knows who wants everything.
That's the key, too.
That's key number two.
He is said to have found some kind of exotic vase, Oriental vase, and paid $100 for it, and went to the telephone, and sold it for $100,000, like, over the poem.
I mean, these stories, you have stories like this in the book.
The Tamerlane story is like that sweetmeats tray.
You don't have a picture of that in there.
Bond and Morris.
It's one of the world's ugliest.
The ugliest thing you've ever seen.
It really is.
I wouldn't have ours.
I would have left it there for the five dollars.
But she knew.
She knew.
Yeah, there was something about it.
Or maybe it was whatever it was, three or four dollars.
But lucky for you that your people knew, too.
Oh, yeah.
Well, that's what you have experts for, you know.
I've read somewhere, not your quote, but I'll have their eyes if they make them as not quite.
Where did I read that quote?
I don't think it's your quote.
No, it's not mine.
It would be mine.
But they better be right, something like that.
Yeah.
Well, I'm very fortunate to have the kind of experts that we do have.
That's a great place.
Malcolm Forbes, he collects everything, right?